---
toc: true
layout: post
description: How to go from problem statement to solution in production?
categories: [markdown]
title: End-to-End Data Science Process
---
![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1800/1*Sicdft5MMryjrPmtzTo4Fg.png)

In this post, I am going to cover a typical end-to-end data science process.

*Watch this episode on YouTube
*[here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dqsEyiyYXQk)*.*

From data science use-case identification to the deployment of the models in
production, so much goes into data science projects.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*KuOxm0dz39TPaduJd-IDqg.png)

So what is it like to work in a data science project? What are the high-level
steps?

Let's have a look in this postâ€¦

Before looking into the end to end data science process, I would like to quickly
mention about data systems and the typical data lifecycle in an organization.

There are mainly two types of data systems: transactional and analytical.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*ZbW08nuP1m6IARfRyrt-jg.png)

Transactional systems support day to day business operations, while analytical
systems enable better decision making.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*vCSf7lTRBFSA7W7WrkBVkg.png)

Basically, the raw data is collected, stored, processed, analysed and presented
to business stakeholders as actionable insight.

As data gets old and less relevant, it can be archived and purged based on the
requirement.

Now, let's have a look at the high-level steps in a data science project.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*PSZbwBOD8mxJWUfwTB0CIg.png)

The first step is Identify

Most of the time, you may start with defining the problem statement, but many a
time, you may not have a problem at hand to solve.

In that case, you may need to first identify the use-cases for data science and
may also need to qualify those use-cases.

If you have identified and qualified many use-cases, then you may also need to
prioritize them based on their return-on-investment (ROI).

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*423WT7fPnp1zdjiJEF7uYw.png)

The next step is Define

After identifying the use case, you define the problem statement, you gather
business or domain aspects and you start building your understanding around the
data available.

You design a high-level approach for the solution, discuss and define the
key-performance-indicators (KPIs) with the business sponsors.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*X1M-ZcsC_y-LWpcDUBOluA.png)

The third step is Assess

Most of the time, it is worthwhile to start with a prototype or proof of concept
(POC) rather than involving in a full-fledged project.

Building prototype is a way to assess the feasibility of the data science
project before investing heavily, here you do all the steps required in a data
science project but on a smaller scale.

Once you have built a prototype and stakeholders give a go-ahead, you start the
project formally.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*Ezg2cxY-Q7l_NMTi3eyomw.png)

The next step is Build

You collect and explore the data, you validate and clean it, you apply
transformations to make the data ready-to-be-consumed for core data science
tasks.

Then you build the necessary features, split the train, validation and test
data-set and also train, validate & tune the model.

Above steps are iterative, which means you would be continuously munging the
data, building and modifying features; training, validating and tuning the
models until you get the required results.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*ZrryVaYrzXOTQzpsLYN9tg.png)

The fifth step is Deploy

Once your model provides required accuracy, you deploy it in an environment to
get the feedback from business stakeholders.

After getting the positive feedback, you build required dashboards for business
KPIs, and make your data science solution live.

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1200/1*hQ0Ou8B7OIcJ3UVc_d0_tQ.png)

The last step is Monitor

Once your model is in production, you need to monitor the data and model
performance over the period of time for any performance degradation.

If a model performance goes down, you do a root-cause-analysis, replicate the
issue in a different environment and repeat above mentioned steps to identify
and resolve the issue.

So these are the six high-level steps in an end-to-end data science project.

I hope you like this post, let me know in the comments section.

Let's end this post here;

Like, share & subscribe to my YouTube channel to get the latest updates.

*****

[Ankit Rathi](https://www.ankitrathi.com/) *is an AI architect, published author
& well-known speaker. His interest lies primarily in building end-to-end AI
applications/products following best practices of Data Engineering and
Architecture.*

